docs/dev/contributing.rst, before:

Contributing
============

All contributions are welcome!

In order to ease the start for you to contribute,
please follow these guidelines.

*Please note:* Pynguin development currently takes place on a private repository.
Our public GitHub repository just serves as a mirror of released versions.
If you are interested in contributing to Pynguin please contact use beforehand.

Dependencies
------------

We use ``poetry`` to manage the `dependencies`_
If you do not have ``poetry`` installed,
you should run the command below::

    make download-poetry

To install dependencies and prepare `pre-commit`_ hooks
you would need to run the ``install`` command::

    make install

To activate your ``virtualenv`` run ``poetry shell``.
We refer you to the documentation of ``poetry`` for further details on the tool.

Git Development Workflow
------------------------

*Note:* Our internal development takes place in a private repository thus this
information is related to this repository.

Since 2020–10–26 we have changed the contribution workflow a bit.

It is now required to have at least one acknowledge from code review for a merge
request to be merged.
Code review can (and should) be done by all project members, no matter whether they are
developers or maintainers.
We strongly encourage every project member to actively participate in code review
because we believe it is an important skill in software development and also a good
training in reading and understanding other people's code.
A nice introduction on merge-request review can be found in a `Twitter thread
<https://twitter.com/curtiseinsmann/status/1317149417330364421>`_ by Curtis Einsmann
of AWS.

Besides the mandatory code review we now push the Gitflow Workflow for development.
It was first introduced by `Vincent Driessen at nvie <https://nvie
.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/>`_.
A shorter introduction can be found in the `Atlassian Git Tutorials <https://www
.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/gitflow-workflow>`_.
Please familiarise yourself with this workflow if you are not yet familiar and stick
to it whenever possible.

Code Style
----------

After you run ``make install`` you can execute the automatic code formating::

    make codestyle

We require the `black`_ code style, with 88 characters per line maximum width
(exceptions are only permitted for imports and comments that disable, e.g., a
``pylint`` warning).  Imports are ordered using `isort`_.  Docstrings shall conform
to the `Google Python Style Guide`_.  Except from the above-mentioned differences, we
suggest to conform the the Google Python Style Guide as much as possible.

In particular, we want to point to Sec. 2.14 of Google's style guide, regarding
``None`` checks.

Import from ``__future__`` are not permitted except for the ``from __future__ import
annotations`` feature that allows more concise type hints.  Pynguin requires at least
Python 3.8—there is not need to support older versions here!

Checks
^^^^^^

Many checks are configured for this project.
The command ``make check`` will run black diffs, darglint docstring style and
mypy.
The ``make check-safety`` command will look at the security of our code.

*Note:* darglint on Windows only runs in ``git bash`` or the Linux subsystem.

You can also use the ``STRICT=1`` flag to make the check be strict.

We use the following tools and checks:

- `isort`_ for import ordering
- `black`_ for code formatting
- `mypy`_ for type checking
- `flake8`_ and `pylint`_ for code linting
- `darglint`_ to lint the docstrings

Before Submitting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before submitting your code please do the following steps:

1. Add any changes you want
2. Add tests for the new changes (can be done vice versa of course, if you follow the
   TDD principles, which we highly recommend to do)
3. Edit documentation if you have changed something significant
4. Run ``make check`` and fix all complaints by the automated checks before you
   commit and push your changes

Unit Tests
----------

Pynguin uses `pytest`_ to execute the tests.
You can find the tests in the ``tests`` folder.
The target ``make test`` executes ``pytest`` with the appropriate parameters.

We prefer a test-driven development style, which allows us to have tests in a natural
way when developing some new functionality.

To combine all analysis tools and the test execution we provide the target ``make
check``, which executes all of them in a row.

Development using PyCharm
-------------------------

If you want to use the PyCharm IDE you have to set up a few things:

1. Import Pynguin into PyCharm.
2. Find the location of the virtual environment by running ``poetry env info`` in the
   project directory.
3. Go to ``Settings``/``Project: pynguin``/``Project interpreter``
4. Add and use an existing interpreter that points to the path of the virtual
   environment
5. Set the default test runner to ``pytest``
6. Set the docstrings format to ``Google``


.. _dependencies: https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry
.. _pre-commit: https://pre-commit.com
.. _black: https://github.com/psf/black
.. _isort: https://github.com/timothycrosley/isort
.. _`Google Python Style Guide`: https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html
.. _pytest: https://pytest.org/
.. _mypy: http://mypy-lang.org
.. _flake8: https://flake8.pycqa.org
.. _pylint: https://pylint.pycqa.org
.. _darglint: https://github.com/terrencepreilly/darglint

Commit message:

Further changes regarding branch renaming

docs/dev/contributing.rst, after:

Contributing
============

All contributions are welcome!

In order to ease the start for you to contribute,
please follow these guidelines.

*Please note:* Pynguin development currently takes place on a private repository.
Our public GitHub repository just serves as a mirror of released versions.
If you are interested in contributing to Pynguin please contact use beforehand.

Dependencies
------------

We use ``poetry`` to manage the `dependencies`_
If you do not have ``poetry`` installed,
you should run the command below::

    make download-poetry

To install dependencies and prepare `pre-commit`_ hooks
you would need to run the ``install`` command::

    make install

To activate your ``virtualenv`` run ``poetry shell``.
We refer you to the documentation of ``poetry`` for further details on the tool.

Git Development Workflow
------------------------

*Note:* Our internal development takes place in a private repository thus this
information is related to this repository.

To contribute to Pynguin,
we ask you to create an issue and a related merge request.
Commit and push your changes to the merge request.
The changes will run through our continuous-integration system
as well as through manual code review.
Once all checks pass and the changes were approved,
we'll merge them into our ``main`` branch.

Code Style
----------

After you run ``make install`` you can execute the automatic code formating::

    make codestyle

We require the `black`_ code style, with 88 characters per line maximum width
(exceptions are only permitted for imports and comments that disable, e.g., a
``pylint`` warning).  Imports are ordered using `isort`_.  Docstrings shall conform
to the `Google Python Style Guide`_.  Except from the above-mentioned differences, we
suggest to conform the the Google Python Style Guide as much as possible.

In particular, we want to point to Sec. 2.14 of Google's style guide, regarding
``None`` checks.

Import from ``__future__`` are not permitted except for the ``from __future__ import
annotations`` feature that allows more concise type hints.  Pynguin requires at least
Python 3.8—there is not need to support older versions here!

Checks
^^^^^^

Many checks are configured for this project.
The command ``make check`` will run black diffs, darglint docstring style and
mypy.
The ``make check-safety`` command will look at the security of our code.

*Note:* darglint on Windows only runs in ``git bash`` or the Linux subsystem.

You can also use the ``STRICT=1`` flag to make the check be strict.

We use the following tools and checks:

- `isort`_ for import ordering
- `black`_ for code formatting
- `mypy`_ for type checking
- `flake8`_ and `pylint`_ for code linting
- `darglint`_ to lint the docstrings

Before Submitting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before submitting your code please do the following steps:

1. Add any changes you want
2. Add tests for the new changes (can be done vice versa of course, if you follow the
   TDD principles, which we highly recommend to do)
3. Edit documentation if you have changed something significant
4. Run ``make check`` and fix all complaints by the automated checks before you
   commit and push your changes

Unit Tests
----------

Pynguin uses `pytest`_ to execute the tests.
You can find the tests in the ``tests`` folder.
The target ``make test`` executes ``pytest`` with the appropriate parameters.

We prefer a test-driven development style, which allows us to have tests in a natural
way when developing some new functionality.

To combine all analysis tools and the test execution we provide the target ``make
check``, which executes all of them in a row.

Development using PyCharm
-------------------------

If you want to use the PyCharm IDE you have to set up a few things:

1. Import Pynguin into PyCharm.
2. Find the location of the virtual environment by running ``poetry env info`` in the
   project directory.
3. Go to ``Settings``/``Project: pynguin``/``Project interpreter``
4. Add and use an existing interpreter that points to the path of the virtual
   environment
5. Set the default test runner to ``pytest``
6. Set the docstrings format to ``Google``


.. _dependencies: https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry
.. _pre-commit: https://pre-commit.com
.. _black: https://github.com/psf/black
.. _isort: https://github.com/timothycrosley/isort
.. _`Google Python Style Guide`: https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html
.. _pytest: https://pytest.org/
.. _mypy: http://mypy-lang.org
.. _flake8: https://flake8.pycqa.org
.. _pylint: https://pylint.pycqa.org
.. _darglint: https://github.com/terrencepreilly/darglint
